chore: add readme (#2)
daKmoR/testing-workflow-for-web-components: README.md

---

> title: Testing workflow for web-components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Testing Workflow for Web Components
```

published: false

> description: Testing and debugging your web component is an important skill to give you the confidence the code you share is production ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn to test and debug your web component with open-wc tools so you can deploy or share your production-ready code with confidence.
```

tags: webcomponents, javascript, testing, karma
---

> Whenever you ship something to be used by others you take on a responsibility to deliver safe and stable code. Unfortunately, this responsibility is not always taken care of, and one way to improve this is by testing your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever you ship something to be used by others, you take on a responsibility to deliver safe and stable code. One way to address this is by testing your code.
```

Reviewer: didn't seem your style to point out some widespread lack of testing

> No matter how small - no matter how simple your project, there should always be tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter how small - no matter how simple your project, there should always ideally be tests.
```

> Yes, I know reality hits hard and there will be many cases where that doesn't happen - but you should always strive to have tests

### Disclaimer

> In this tutorial, we're going to make a simple version of an accessible input. The aim of this tutorial is to give you a solid understanding of how to put our testing tools to practice, and get a solid and well-tested project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we're going to make a simple version of an input element. By the end of it, you'll gain the skills and knowledge to put open-wc testing tools to practice; and build a solid, accessible, and well-tested input component.
```

Reviewer: I removed the qualifier 'accessible' from the input (is 'accessible' just a sub category of input?) and moved it instead to the success criteria.

If you want to play along - all the code is on [github](https://github.com/daKmoR/testing-workflow-for-web-components).

> ## Let's get started!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Let's Get Started!
```

> Start by following the instructions at [https://open-wc.org/testing/](https://open-wc.org/testing/) you should have the basic setup up and running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the instructions at [https://open-wc.org/testing/](https://open-wc.org/testing/) to generate a basic project with testing setup.
```

Let's create `src/a11y-input.js`;
```js
import { LitElement, html, css } from 'lit-element';

export class A11yInput extends LitElement {}

customElements.define('a11y-input', A11yInput);
```

and `test/a11y-input.test.js`;
```js

> /* eslint-disable no-unused-expressions */

Reviewer: agreed, this is better in eslintrc. even as overrides for a specific version of lint config.

import { html, fixture, expect } from '@open-wc/testing';

import '../src/a11y-input.js';

/**
 * @typedef {import('../src/a11y-input.js').A11yInput} A11yInput
 */

describe('a11y input', () => {
  it('has by default an empty string as label', async () => {
    const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture('<a11y-input></a11y-input>'));
    expect(el.label).to.equal('');
  });
});
```

> Let's see if everything works correctly by running: `npm run test`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our tests so far consist of a single feature (the `label` property) and a single assertion (`expect`). We're using karma and chai's <abbr title="behaviour/business-driven-development">BDD</abbr> syntax, so we group sets of tests (`it`) under the features or APIs they relate to (`describe`).

Let's see if everything works correctly by running: `npm run test`.
```

```
SUMMARY:
✔ 0 tests completed
✖ 1 test failed

FAILED TESTS:
  a11y input
    ✖ has by default an empty string as label
      HeadlessChrome 73.0.3683 (Windows 10.0.0)
    AssertionError: expected undefined to equal ''

      + expected - actual

      -[undefined]
      +""
```

> Awesome - just as expected, we have a failing test :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Awesome - just as expected (🥁), we have a failing test :)
```

> Let's switch into watch mode `npm run test:watch`, this will run the tests simultaneously when you make some changes to your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's switch into watch mode, which will run the tests continuously whenever you make changes to your code.

```npm run test:watch```
```

![01-watch-mode-intro](https://github.com/daKmoR/testing-workflow-for-web-components/raw/master/images/01-watch-mode-intro.gif)

> So far so good? Still with us? Great! Let's up the game a little.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, so good? Still with us? Great! Let's up the game a little...
```

> ### Adding a test for shadow dom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding a Test for Shadow DOM
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's add an assertion to test the contents of our element's shadow root.

```

```js

> it('has a static shadowDom', async () => {

Reviewer: Should this be it's own `describe`?

  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `));
  expect(el.shadowRoot.innerHTML).to.equal(`
    <slot name="label"></slot>
    <slot name="input"></slot>
  `);
});
```

> As expected we get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As expected, we get:
```

```
✖ has a static shadowDom
AssertionError: expected '' to equal '\n      <slot name="label"></slot>\n      <slot name="input"></slot>\n    '

  + expected - actual

  +
  +      <slot name="label"></slot>
  +      <slot name="input"></slot>
  +
```

> Add the implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So let's implement that in our element.
```

```js
render() {
  return html`
    <slot name="label"></slot>
    <slot name="input"></slot>
  `;
}
```

Interesting, the test should be green... but it's not :/ Let's take a look.
```
✖ has a static shadowDom
AssertionError: expected '<!---->\n      <slot name="label"></slot>\n      <slot name="input"></slot>\n    <!---->' to equal '\n        <slot name="label"></slot>\n        <slot name="input"></slot>\n    '

  + expected - actual

  -<!---->
  -      <slot name="label"></slot>
  -      <slot name="input"></slot>
  -    <!---->
  +
  +        <slot name="label"></slot>
  +        <slot name="input"></slot>
  +
```

You may have noticed those weird empty comment `<!---->` tags. They are markers that `lit-html` uses to remember where dynamic parts are, so it can be updated efficiently. For testing however, this can be a little annoying to deal with.

> Do we really need to match the exact same indentation in code and test, and incorporate those markers?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we use `innerHTML` to compare the DOM, we'd have to rely on simple string equality. Under those circumstances, we'd have to exactly match the generated DOM's whitespace, comments, etc; in other words: it will need to be a perfect match. Really all we need to test is that the elements we want to render are rendered. We want to test the *semantic* contents of the shadow root.
```

> If you use innerHTML and compare the DOM then it's "just" a string compare so it will need to be a perfect match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**@open-wc/chai helper to the rescue**

> Fortunately, we got you covered. If you're using `@open-wc/testing` then it automatically loads a specific plugin for this for us to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, we've got you covered. If you're using `@open-wc/testing` then it automatically loads the `chai-dom-equals` plugin for us to use.
```

Author: fyi - that plugin is deprecated... functionality has moved to `semantic-dom-diff`

So let's try it out :muscle:

```js
// old:
expect(el.shadowRoot.innerHTML).to.equal(`...`);

// new:
expect(el).shadowDom.to.equal(`
  <slot name="label"></slot>
  <slot name="input"></slot>
`);
```

Bam :tada:

```
a11y input
  ✔ has by default an empty string as a label
  ✔ has a static shadowDom
```

### How does shadowDom.to.equal() work?

> 1. It gets the innerHTML of the shadowRoot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It gets the `innerHTML` of the shadow root
```

2. Parses it (actually, the browser parses it - no library needed)
3. Normalizes it (potentially every tag/property on its own line)

> 4. It does 2 + 3 for the expected html string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Parses and normalizes the expected HTML string
```

> 5. Pass both normalized dom strings on to the default chai compare

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Passes both normalized DOM strings on to chai's default compare function
```

> 6. Show and group differences in a clear manner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. In case of failure, groups and displays any differences in a clear manner
```

If you want know more, please check out the documentation at: [semantic-dom-diff](https://open-wc.org/testing/semantic-dom-diff.html).

> ### Testing the lightDom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing the "Light" DOM
```

> We can do exactly the same thing with the light dom. (The dom which will be provided by our user or our defaults).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can do exactly the same thing with the light DOM. (The DOM which will be provided by our user or our defaults, i.e. the element's `children`).
```

```js
it('has 1 input and 1 label in light-dom', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input .label=${'foo'}></a11y-input>
  `));
  expect(el).lightDom.to.equal(`
    <label slot="label">foo</label>
    <input slot="input">
  `);
});
```

And let's implement it.

```js
connectedCallback() {
  super.connectedCallback();
  this.labelEl = document.createElement('label');
  this.labelEl.innerText = this.label;
  this.labelEl.setAttribute('slot', 'label');
  this.appendChild(this.labelEl);

  this.inputEl = document.createElement('input');
  this.inputEl.setAttribute('slot', 'input');
  this.appendChild(this.inputEl);
}
```

> > Note: Yes, this is somewhat of an anti-pattern, however to allow for a11y it might be a real use case - anyways it's great for illustration purposes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Using the DOM API in a lit-element's lifecycle is an anti-pattern, however to allow for <abbr title="accesibility">a11y</abbr> it might be a real use case - anyways it's great for illustration purposes
```

Now, this leads to a certain problem - can you guess it?

> ### My Filter App

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using Our Element in an App
```

> So now that we have a basic a11y input let's use it in our application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So now that we have a basic a11y input let's use it - and test it - in our application.
```

import '../src/my-app.js';

/**
 * @typedef {import('../src/my-app.js').MyApp} MyApp
 */

describe('My Filter App', () => {
  it('has a heading and a search field', async () => {
    const el = /** @type {MyApp} */ (await fixture(html`
      <my-app .label=${'foo'}></my-app>
    `));
    expect(el).shadowDom.to.equal(`
      <h1>My Filter App</h1>
      <a11y-input></a11y-input>
    `);
  });
});
```

and then we render it like so:
```js
render() {
  return html`
    <h1>My Filter App</h1>
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `;
}
```

But oh no! That should be green...

```
SUMMARY:
✔ 3 tests completed
✖ 1 test failed

FAILED TESTS:
  My Filter App
    ✖ has a heading and a search field
    AssertionError: expected '<h1>\n  My Filter App\n</h1>\n<a11y-input>\n  <label slot="label">\n  </label>\n  <input slot="input">\n</a11y-input>\n' to equal '<h1>\n  My Filter App\n</h1>\n<a11y-input>\n</a11y-input>\n'

      + expected - actual

       <h1>
         My Filter App
       </h1>
       <a11y-input>
      -  <label slot="label">
      -  </label>
      -  <input slot="input">
       </a11y-input>
```

So I'm only interested in `a11y-input` not in its implementation detail.

> As an app developer, I'm now a little unlucky as this element "plays" in my domain. Preposterous!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an app developer, am I constrained to fit my app's tests around the element's implementation? Preposterous!
```

After some investigation I conclude there are very valid reasons for a11y input to do what it does.
But how can I test it?

Luckily `.shadowDom` has another ace up its sleeve; it allows us to ignore parts of dom.

```js
expect(el).shadowDom.to.equal(
  `
  <h1>My Filter App</h1>
  <a11y-input></a11y-input>
`,
  { ignoreChildren: ['a11y-input'] },
);
```

We can even specify the following properties as well:

> - ignoreChildren

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ignoreChildren`
```

> - ignoreTags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ignoreTags`
```

> - ignoreAttributes (globally or for specific tags)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ignoreAttributes` (globally or for specific tags)
```

For more details please see [semantic-dom-diff](https://open-wc.org/testing/semantic-dom-diff.html).

> ### Code coverage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Code Coverage
```

> Another metric we get when we do testing is code coverage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another useful metric we get when testing with the open-wc setup is code coverage.
```

> So how can we get it and what does it mean?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what does it mean and how can we get it? [Code coverage](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Code_coverage) is a measure of *how much* of our code is checked by tests. If there's a line, statement, function, or branch (e.g. `if`/`else` statement) that our tests don't cover our coverage score will be affected.
```

A simple `npm run test` is all we need and you will get the following:

```
=============================== Coverage summary ===============================
Statements   : 100% ( 15/15 )
Branches     : 100% ( 0/0 )
Functions    : 100% ( 5/5 )
Lines        : 100% ( 15/15 )
================================================================================
```

> Which is already pretty neat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which means that 100% of our code's statements, branches, functions, and lines are covered by tests. Pretty neat!
```

```js
get value() {
  return this.inputEl.value;
}

set value(newValue) {
  if (newValue === 'cat') {
    console.log('We like cats too :)');
  }
  this.inputEl.value = newValue;
}
```

It's a vastly different result
```
SUMMARY:
✔ 4 tests completed
TOTAL: 4 SUCCESS

=============================== Coverage summary ===============================
Statements   : 81.82% ( 18/22 )
Branches     : 0% ( 0/2 )
Functions    : 75% ( 6/8 )
Lines        : 81.82% ( 18/22 )
================================================================================
06 04 2019 10:40:45.380:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for statements (81.82%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for lines (81.82%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for branches (0%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for functions (75%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
```

> So first of our coverage is way lower than before and our command even fails although all tests run successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our coverage is way lower than before. Our test command even fails, even though all the tests run successfully.
```

> Apparently, there is a 90% limit on what your code coverage should be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because by default open-wc's config sets a 90% threshold for code coverage.
```

So let's add a test
```js
it('can set/get the input value directly via the custom element', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input .value=${'foo'}></a11y-input>
  `));
  expect(el.value).to.equal('foo');
});
```

uh oh :scream:
```
FAILED TESTS:
  a11y input
    ✖ can set/get the input value directly via the custom element
    TypeError: Cannot set property 'value' of null        at HTMLElement.set value [as value]
    // ... => long error stack
```

> That seems to be too harsh to just figure out in my head, I'll need to see some actual nodes and inspect them in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That was unexpected... This error seems to be too harsh to just figure out in my head, I'll need to see some actual nodes and inspect them in the browser.
```

> ### Debugging in the browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Debugging in the Browser
```

> - be sure you started with `npm run test:watch`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we run our test with watch, karma sets up a persistent browser environment to run tests in. 

- Be sure you started with `npm run test:watch`
```

- visit [http://localhost:9876/debug.html](http://localhost:9876/debug.html)

You should see something like this
![02-debugging-in-browser](https://github.com/daKmoR/testing-workflow-for-web-components/raw/master/images/02-debugging-in-browser.png)

You can click on the circled play button to only run one individual test.

So let's open the Chrome Dev Tools (F12) and put a debugger in the code.

```js
it('can set/get the input value directly via the custom element', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input .value=${'foo'}></a11y-input>
  `));
  debugger;
  expect(el.value).to.equal('foo');
});
```

> Dang.. the error happens even before that point...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But doing that, we see that the error happens even before that point...
```

```js
set value(newValue) {
  debugger;
```

Alright, let's see what we have here
```js
// console.log(this);
<a11y-input>
  #shadow-root (open)
</a11y-input>
```

Ahh there we have it - the shadow dom is not yet rendered when the setter is called.
So let's be safe and add:

```js
set value(newValue) {
  if (newValue === 'cat') {
    console.log('We like cats too :)');
  }
  if (this.inputEl) {
    this.inputEl.value = newValue;
  }
}
```

Now our setter doesn't break anymore but we still an AssertionError:
```
✖ can set/get the input value directly via the custom element
AssertionError: expected '' to equal 'foo'
```

> We may need a change of tactic :thinking: We can either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We may need a change of tactic. :thinking: We can either:
```

- add it as a separate property
- sync it when needed

```js
static get properties() {
  return {
    label: { type: String },
    value: { type: String },
  };
}

constructor() {
  super();
  this.label = '';
  this.value = '';
  // ...
}

update(changedProperties) {
  super.update(changedProperties);
  if (changedProperties.has('value')) {
    if (this.value === 'cat') {
      console.log('We like cats too :)');
    }
    this.inputEl.value = this.value;
  }
}
```

And we're finally back in business! :tada:

### Back to coverage

With this added test we made some progress.

```
=============================== Coverage summary ===============================
Statements   : 95.83% ( 23/24 )
Branches     : 50% ( 2/4 )
Functions    : 100% ( 7/7 )
Lines        : 95.83% ( 23/24 )
================================================================================
06 04 2019 13:18:54.902:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for branches (50%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
```

However we are still not fully there - the question is why?

> To find out open `coverage/index.html` in your browser. (No web server needed just open the file in your browser.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out open `coverage/index.html` in your browser. No web server needed just open the file in your browser - on a mac you can do that from the command line with `open coverage/index.html`
```

Statements   : 100% ( 24/24 )
Branches     : 100% ( 4/4 )
Functions    : 100% ( 7/7 )
Lines        : 100% ( 24/24 )
================================================================================
```

But wait we didn't even finish the test above it still has
```js
  // somehow check that console.log was called
```

#### How come we have 100% test coverage?

Lets first try to understand how code coverage works :thinking:
The way code coverage gets measured is by applying a form of `instrumentation`. In short, before our code is executed it gets changed (`instrumented`) and it behaves something like this:

**Note:** This is a super simplified version for illustration purposes.
```js
if (this.value === 'cat') {
  console.log('We like cats too :)');
}

// becomes something like this (psoido code)
__instrumented['functionUpdate'] += 1;
if (this.value === 'cat') {
  __instrumented['functionUpdateBranch1yes'] += 1;
  console.log('We like cats too :)');
} else {
  __instrumented['functionUpdateBranch1no'] += 1;
}
```

Basically, your code gets littered with many many flags. Based on which flags are set you can create a statistic.

> So 100% test coverage only means that every line you have in your code was executed at least once after all your tests finished. It does NOT mean that you tested everything or if you are expecting the correct things. You should see it as a tool that can give you guidance and help on spotting not executed lines of code in your tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So 100% test coverage only means that every line you have in your code was executed at least once after all your tests finished. It does *not* mean that you tested everything, or if your tests make the correct assertions.

You should therefore see code coverage as a tool that only gives you guidance and help on spotting some missing tests, rather than a hard guarantee of code quality.
```

> ### Spying on code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Spying on Code
```

> If you want to check how often a function gets called or with which parameters then it's called spying.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to check how often or with which parameters a function gets called, that's called spying.
```

> I would recommend [sinon](https://sinonjs.org/) for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-wc recommends the venerable [sinon](https://sinonjs.org/) package, which provides many tools for spying and other related tasks.
```

```bash
npm i -D sinon
```

Let's write a test using it
```js

> import sinon from 'sinon';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { spy } from 'sinon';
```

Author: that does not work with karma as webpack will load the transpiled version and not the es module version... and apparently they do not export the same things?

it('outputs "We like cats too :)" if the value is set to "cat"', async () => {

>   const logSpy = sinon.spy(console, 'log');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const logSpy = spy(console, 'log');
```

  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `));

  el.value = 'cat';
  expect(logSpy.callCount).to.equal(1);
});
```

Uh oh... the test fails:
```
AssertionError: expected 0 to equal 1
```

> After some research, we'll find out that testing a `console.log` is nasty and it would be better to refactor the code to a custom log function.

Reviewer: Since this is really an opinion (you can mock console in tests if you watn and it will work), This should link to some article on *why* spying on console is bad.

Sure let's do that :)

```js
update(changedProperties) {
  super.update(changedProperties);
  if (changedProperties.has('value')) {
    if (this.value === 'cat') {
      this.log('We like cats too :)');
    }
    this.inputEl.value = this.value;
  }
}

log(msg) {
  console.log(msg);
}
```

Now we also no longer need to check for a global object - sweet :hugs:

```js
it('logs "We like cats too :)" if the value is set to "cat"', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `));

>   const logSpy = sinon.spy(el, 'log');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const logSpy = spy(el, 'log');
```

  el.value = 'cat';
  expect(logSpy.callCount).to.equal(1);
});
```

> However, we still the same error. Let's debug... boohoo apparently `update` is already patched and async.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we still see the same error. After debugging in the browser, we see that apparently `update` is already patched and async 😢 .
```

There seems to be no public API to enable sync logging for properties.
Let's create an issue for it https://github.com/Polymer/lit-element/issues/643.

For now apparently, the only way is to rely on a *private* api. :see_no_evil:
Also, we need to move the value sync to `updated` so it gets executed after every dom render.

```js
_requestUpdate(name, oldValue) {
  super._requestUpdate(name, oldValue);
  if (name === 'value') {
    if (this.value === 'cat') {
      this.log('We like cats too :)');
    }
  }
}

updated(changedProperties) {
  super.updated(changedProperties);
  if (changedProperties.has('value')) {
    this.inputEl.value = this.value;
  }
}
```

and here is the updated test for the logging
```js
it('logs "We like cats too :)" if the value is set to "cat"', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `));

>   const logSpy = sinon.spy(el, 'log');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const logSpy = spy(el, 'log');
```

  el.value = 'cat';
  expect(logSpy.callCount).to.equal(1);
  expect(logSpy.calledWith('We like cats too :)')).to.be.true;

  // different values do NOT log
  el.value = 'foo';
  expect(logSpy.callCount).to.equal(1);

  el.value = 'cat';
  expect(logSpy.callCount).to.equal(2);
});
```

wow, that was a little tougher than expected but we did it :muscle:

```
SUMMARY:
✔ 7 tests completed
TOTAL: 7 SUCCESS
```

> ### Run it bare bone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running Tests Without Karma Framework
```

> The nice thing with everything we proposed so far is that we only used es modules and did no transpilation at all (except bare modules specifiers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Karma framework is powerful and feature-rich, but sometimes we might want to pare-down our testing regiment. The nice thing with everything we proposed so far is that we only used browser-standard es modules with no need for transpilation, [with the one exception of bare modules specifiers](https://open-wc.org/about/rationales.html#workflows).
```

So just by creating a `test/index.html`.

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <link href="../node_modules/mocha/mocha.css" rel="stylesheet" />
  <script src="../node_modules/mocha/mocha.js"></script>
  <script src="../node_modules/@webcomponents/webcomponentsjs/webcomponents-bundle.js"></script>
</head>
<body>
  <div id="mocha"></div>
  <script>
    mocha.setup('bdd');
  </script>

  <script type="module">
    import './a11y-input.test.js';
    import './my-app.test.js';

    mocha.checkLeaks();
    mocha.run();
  </script>
</body>
</html>
```

and opening it via `owc-dev-server` in chrome, it will work perfectly fine.
We got everything up and running without `webpack` or `karma` - sweet :hugs:

> ### Do the cross-browser thing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Do the Cross-Browser Thing
```

> We now feel pretty comfortable with our web component just one more step - we want to make sure and test it in all browsers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now feel pretty comfortable with our web component. It's tested and covered; there's just one more step - we want to make sure it runs and is tested in all browsers.
```

> If you didn't setup Browserstack before, you can do it now - here is the link again - [https://open-wc.org/testing/](https://open-wc.org/testing/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open WC recommends [Browserstack](https://www.browserstack.com/) for cross-browser testing. If you haven't set it up yet, you can do it now - here is the link again - [https://open-wc.org/testing/](https://open-wc.org/testing/).
```

So let's just run it
```

> npm run test:bs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npm run test:bs

SUMMARY:
✔ 42 tests completed
TOTAL: 42 SUCCESS
```

```

> uh yeah that works nicely :hugs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yeah, that works nicely! :hugs:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> SUMMARY:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ✔ 42 tests completed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> TOTAL: 42 SUCCESS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Also if you want to adjust the browser that gets tested you can adjust your `karma.bs.config.js`.

For example, if you want to add the `Firefox ESR` to your list.

```js
module.exports = config => {
  config.set(
    merge(bsSettings(config), createBaseConfig(config), {
      browserStack: {
        project: 'testing-workflow-for-web-components',
      },
      browsers: [
        'bs_win10_firefox_ESR',
      ],
      // define browsers
      // https://www.browserstack.com/automate/capabilities
      customLaunchers: {
        bs_win10_firefox_ESR: {
          base: 'BrowserStack',
          browser: 'Firefox',
          browser_version: '60',
          os: 'Windows',
          os_version: '10',
        },
      },
    }),
  );

  return config;
};
```

Or maybe you want to test only 2 specific browsers?

```js
merge.strategy({
  browsers: 'replace',
})(bsSettings(config), createBaseConfig(config), {
  browserStack: {
    project: 'testing-workflow-for-web-components',
  },
  browsers: [
    'bs_win10_ie_11',
    'bs_win10_firefox_ESR',
  ],
}),
```

**Note:** This uses the [webpack merge strategies](https://github.com/survivejs/webpack-merge#merging-with-strategies) replace.

> ## Quick recap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Quick Recap
```

> - Be sure to write lots of tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing is important for every project. Be sure to write as many as you can.
```

> - Try to keep your code coverage high (however, it does not always need to be 100%)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Try to keep your code coverage high, but remember it's not a magic guarantee, so it doesn't always need to be 100%.
```

> - Debug in the browser via `npm run test:watch` for legacy browser use `npm run test:legacy.watch`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Debug in the browser via `npm run test:watch`. For legacy browsers, use `npm run test:legacy.watch`.
```

> ## What's next?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's Next?
```

- Run the tests in your CI (works perfectly well together with browserstack). See our recommendations at [automating](https://open-wc.org/automating/).

Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/openwc), or follow me on my personal [Twitter](https://twitter.com/dakmor).

> If you have any interest in web component make sure to check out [open-wc.org](https://open-wc.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure to check out our other tools and recommendations at [open-wc.org](https://open-wc.org).
```

---
title: Testing workflow for web-components
published: false
description: Testing and debugging your web component is an important skill to give you the confidence the code you share is production ready.
tags: webcomponents, javascript, testing, karma
---

Whenever you ship something to be used by others you take on a responsibility.
Unfortunately not always is this responsibility taken care of.
One thing to make sure you take it on is to write tests.

No matter how small - no matter how simple there should be tests.

> *Yes I know reality hit's hard and there will be many cases where that doesn't happen - but strife for it*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Yes I know reality hits hard and there will be many cases where that doesn't happen - but strive for it*
```

> ### Disclaimer

Reviewer 2: What if you create an input wrapper component that takes a user provided input element as a slot? That aligns to best practices and lets you demonstrate light dom.

Additionally maybe it is more powerful to start with an elemeny with only shadow dom, and show a different element with light dom later. That reduces the barrier of entry which is very important. If we confuse people in the start they wont continue

Author: this post is definitely more for the advanced users => I added a warning saying explaining what to expect and what you should know before...

We are going to make a simple version of an accessible input.
Everything you see here is for illustration purposes only - so don't scream at me that you should not do it.
We do it so we can see all the places where our testing workflow can shine.

If you wanna play along - all the code is on [github](https://github.com/daKmoR/testing-workflow-for-web-components).

## Let's get started

After following [https://open-wc.org/testing/](https://open-wc.org/testing/) you should have the basic setup up and running.

Let's create `src/a11y-input.js`;
```js
import { LitElement, html, css } from 'lit-element';

export class A11yInput extends LitElement {}

customElements.define('a11y-input', A11yInput);
```

and `test/a11y-input.test.js`;
```js

> /* eslint-disable no-unused-expressions */

Reviewer 2: This isnt necessary if you have the chai linting plugin. I though we had that in the open wc lint config?

Author: apparently, we don't have it? 🙈

import { html, fixture, expect } from '@open-wc/testing';

import '../src/a11y-input.js';

/**
 * @typedef {import('../src/a11y-input.js').A11yInput} A11yInput
 */

describe('a11y input', () => {
  it('has by default an empty string as label', async () => {

>     const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture('<a11y-input></a11y-input>'));

Reviewer 2: Type definitions might confuse people. Perhaps its better to focus on just tests?

  -      <slot name="label"></slot>
  -      <slot name="input"></slot>
  -    <!---->
  +
  +        <slot name="label"></slot>
  +        <slot name="input"></slot>
  +
```

What are those empty comment `<!---->` tags?
=> They are sort of markers for `lit-html` so it can do its update work as efficiently as possible.

Do we really need to match the exact same indentation in code and test?
=> Jup if you use innerHTML and equals then it's "just" a string compare so it will need to be a perfect match.

**@open-wc/chai helper to the rescue**

If we are using `@open-wc/testing` then it automatically loads a specific plugin for this for us.
So let's use it :muscle:

```js
// old:
expect(el.shadowRoot.innerHTML).to.equal(`...`);

// new:
expect(el).shadowDom.to.equal(`
  <slot name="label"></slot>
  <slot name="input"></slot>
`);
```

Bam :tada:

```
a11y input
  ✔ has by default an empty string as a label
  ✔ has a static shadowDom
```

### How does shadowDom.to.equal() work?

It actually does a lot of work
1. It gets the innerHTML of the shadowRoot
2. Parses it (actually, we let the browser do it - no library needed)
3. Normalizes it (potentially every tag/property on its own line)

> 4. It does 2 + 3 for the expected html string

Reviewer 2: What is 2 + 3? :)

5. Pass both normalizes dom string on to the default chai compare
6. It will show/group differences in a nice way

If you wanna know more please check out [semantic-dom-diff](https://open-wc.org/testing/semantic-dom-diff.html).

### Test the lightDom

We can do exactly the same thing with the light dom.
E.g. the dom which will be provided by our user or we render as well.

```js
it('has 1 input and 1 label in light-dom', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input .label=${'foo'}></a11y-input>
  `));
  expect(el).lightDom.to.equal(`
    <label slot="label">foo</label>
    <input slot="input">
  `);
});
```

And let's implement it.

```js
connectedCallback() {
  super.connectedCallback();
  this.labelEl = document.createElement('label');
  this.labelEl.innerText = this.label;
  this.labelEl.setAttribute('slot', 'label');
  this.appendChild(this.labelEl);

  this.inputEl = document.createElement('input');
  this.inputEl.setAttribute('slot', 'input');
  this.appendChild(this.inputEl);
}
```

> *yes that is sort of an anti-pattern however to allow for a11y it might be a real use case - anyways it's great for illustration purposes*

Reviewer 2: I am not sure many people will understand this. See above

});
```

and then we fill
```js
render() {
  return html`
    <h1>My Filter App</h1>
    <a11y-input></a11y-input>
  `;
}
```

and oh no... that should be green...

```
SUMMARY:
✔ 3 tests completed
✖ 1 test failed

FAILED TESTS:
  My Filter App
    ✖ has a heading and a search field
    AssertionError: expected '<h1>\n  My Filter App\n</h1>\n<a11y-input>\n  <label slot="label">\n  </label>\n  <input slot="input">\n</a11y-input>\n' to equal '<h1>\n  My Filter App\n</h1>\n<a11y-input>\n</a11y-input>\n'

      + expected - actual

       <h1>
         My Filter App
       </h1>
       <a11y-input>
      -  <label slot="label">
      -  </label>
      -  <input slot="input">
       </a11y-input>
```

So I'm only interested in `a11y-input` not in its implementation detail.
As an app developer, I'm now a little unlucky as this element "plays" in my domain. preposterous!
After some investigation I conclude there are very valid reasons for a11y input to do what it does.
Now how can I test it?

Luckily `.shadowDom` has another ace up its sleeve.
As it allows us to ignore certain dom parts.

```js
expect(el).shadowDom.to.equal(
  `
  <h1>My Filter App</h1>
  <a11y-input></a11y-input>
`,

>   { ignoreChildren: ['a11y-input'] },

Reviewer 2: I think we could move this to an advanced section. If you are new to web compoments you dont need this

Author: this whole article is an advanced section 🙈 

added a section at the top asking if there is a need for a simpler version of this post then they should just let us know in the comments 🤗

06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for lines (81.82%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for branches (0%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
06 04 2019 10:40:45.381:ERROR [reporter.coverage-istanbul]: Coverage for functions (75%) does not meet global threshold (90%)
```

So first of our coverage is way lower than before and our command even fails although all tests run successfully.
Apparently, there is a 90% limit on what your code coverage should be.

So let's add a test
```js
it('can set/get the input value directly via the custom element', async () => {
  const el = /** @type {A11yInput} */ (await fixture(html`
    <a11y-input .value=${'foo'}></a11y-input>
  `));
  expect(el.value).to.equal('foo');
});
```

uh oh :scream:
```
FAILED TESTS:
  a11y input
    ✖ can set/get the input value directly via the custom element
    TypeError: Cannot set property 'value' of null        at HTMLElement.set value [as value]
    // ... => long error stack
```

> That seems to be too tough to just figure out in my head I need to see some actual nodes and expect them in the browser.

Reviewer 2: Inspect
